---
title: 3.3 Runway Clearances
toc_min_heading_level: 2
toc_max_heading_level: 5
---
## 3.3.1 Landing Clearance
Except where wake turbulence separation, departure track separation is applied, aircraft will only be cleared to cross the landing threshold when:

- The preceding departing aircraft has crossed the end of the runway-in-use or has started a turn; or
- The preceding landing aircraft is clear of the runway-in-use.
!!! tip "Tip"
    Where necessary to expedite traffic, controller may instruct the aircraft to vacate at a specified exit point, or to expedite vacating the runway.

    In requesting aircraft to perform specific landing roll-out manoeuvres, the type of aircraft, location of exit, runway length, mteorological conditions and reported braking action should be considered by the controller.

    When necessary or desirable (such as during low visibility operations) an aircraft may be instructed to report when a runway has beem vacated.
    
    > **AIR:** *"SVA123, plan to vacate M6, wind 250 degress 10 knots, runway 34R, cleared to land, report vacated."*

---

## 3.3.2 Take-off Clearance
Except where wake turbulence separation, departure track separation is applied, aircraft will normally only be cleared for take-off:

- Once the preceding aircraft has crossed the end of the runway-in-use; or
- The preceding departing aircraft has commenced a turn to clear the runway; or
- Until all preceding landing aircraft are clear of the runway-in-use.
!!! info "Do note"
    The expression "TAKE-OFF" shall only be used when issuing or canceling a take-off clearance.
In the interest of expediting traffic, a clearance for immediate take-off may be issued to an aircraft before it enters the runway. The aircraft will be expected to carry out the line up and take-off in one continuous movement.

> **AIR:** *"SVA123, no delay, wind 250 degress 10 knots, runway 34R, cleared for immediate take-off."*

### 3.3.2.1 Line-up clearance
A line up clearance shall only be issued if **the runway-in-use is not occupied** and there is no arriving traffic less than 5 to 6 NM away from the threshold. Nevertheless, controller may issue conditional clearance when operation permits.

> *(Line-up behind arrival)* <br> **AIR:** *"SVA123, behind the landing company B777, line up and wait, runway 34R, behind."*

> *(Line up behind departure)* <br> **AIR:** *"SVA123, behind the departing company B777, line up and wait, runway 34R, behind."*

---

## 3.3.3 Crossing Clearance
Controller may grant clearance to permit an aircraft or vehicle to transit across an active runway. It ensures that movement through the runway environment occurs without conflicting with arriving or departing traffic.
> **AIR:** *"SVA123, via R, cross runway 34C."*
!!! danger "Be careful!"
    Prior issuing such clearance, controllers must ensure that no aircraft has been **cleared to land or depart on the same runway**. This requires a thorough check of active clearances, traffic sequencing, and runway status. Only once it is confirmed that no conflicting arrival or departure authorization exists may the crossing be permitted, thereby maintaining separation standards and preventing runway incursions.