---
title: 4.2 Separation Minima
toc_min_heading_level: 2
toc_max_heading_level: 5
---
## 4.2.1 General Provisons
**Separation minima** are the established thresholds of distance, altitude, or time that must be maintained between aircraft to limit to, to an acceptanle level, the risk of collision between aircraft and hazards.

---

## 4.2.2 Applicability
Separation minima is applied with **two main methods**:

### 4.2.2.1 Time-based Separation Minima
Time based turbulence separation minima shall be applied for departing traffic in the following cases:

- When aircraft are departing full length from the same runway;
- When aircraft departing from the same point on a parallel runway separated by less than
760 m;
- When aircraft are departing from an intermediate part of the runway following a full length
take off;
- When aircraft are departing from an intermediate part of a parallel runway separated by less
than 760m;
- If the flight paths are expected to cross

#### 4.2.2.1.1 Timing technique
Controllers shall apply the appropriate time-based separation using the following technique to maximise airport departure rate and therefore minimise the appropriate average departure delay

- The timing shall commence when the leading aircraft commences its take-off roll on the runway.
- The take-off clearance for the trailing aircraft shall be given with 15 to 20 seconds remaining of the elapsed time. If this occurs when the leading aircraft has not yet crossed the departure threshold, traffic information shall be provided.

### 4.2.2.2 Distance-based Separation Minima
Distance based wake turbulence separation minima shall be applied when aircraft are on approach
to landing in the following cases:

- On approach to the same runway
- On approach to a dependent parallel runway
- If the flight path of the trailing aircraft is expected to cross within 1000 ft below of the
leading aircraft

If at any time separation reduces to below the specified minima with no other option available, the
succeeding aircraft must be instructed to go around.
!!! info "Do note"
    Where no wake turbulence separation minima exist (eg. SUPER following SUPER), minimum radar separation of **2.5 NM** shall be applied. Where the conditions for the application of this separation are not met (e.g. contaminated runway), minimum separation of **3.0 NM** shall be applied.

---

## 4.2.3 Spacing
Any application of a distance or time between an aircraft and a potential hazard, at or above the prescribed separation minima, designed to prevent conflicts, preserve operational integrity, and sustain a safe and orderly flow of traffic. Such spacing may be based on wake turbulence categories, radar or procedural standards in order to maintain a safe and orderly flow of traffic.
!!! danger "Be careful!"
    Spacing is not the same as separation. Spacing needs to be in excess of the separation minima, so that failure of spacing can result in action before failure of separation.

---

## 4.2.4 Sequencing
**Sequencing** is the systematic arrangement of aircraft movements in a defined order to ensure an orderly and predictable flow of air traffic. It is applied primarily during flight, landing, and departure phases where multiple aircraft converge or depart from the same runway system. The process involves determining the optimal order of aircraft based on factors such as arrival routes, departure priorities, wake turbulence categories, runway occupancy times, and prevailing meteorological conditions.