---
title: 2.4 Take-off Procedures
---

## 2.4.1 General
Within **Saudi Arabia FIR**, certain aerodromes may operate with separate Ground and Tower frequencies. Controllers shall remain mindful of their respective areas of responsibility and conduct handoffs in accordance with established procedures.

Care shall be taken to ensure that phraseology used during taxi operations cannot be misconstrued as a clearance to enter or take off from the runway.

## 2.4.2 Take-off clearance
A take-off clearance shall be issued separately from any other clearance.

When several runways are in use and there is any possibility that confusion may arise as to the
runway to be used, the runway designator shall be stated in the take-off clearance.

Surface wind shall be passed if there is a significant difference to that which has already been
passed.

A take-off clearance should only include the runway holding point if the aircraft is not already
situated at that runway holding point.

### 2.4.2.1 General
!!! Example
    **Controller**: "SAUDIA 123, VIA M1 [SURFACE] WIND 340 DEGREES 5 KNOTS, RUNWAY 34R, CLEARED FOR TAKE-OFF"

    **Pilot**: "VIA M1 RUNWAY 34R, CLEARED FOR TAKE-OFF, SAUDIA 123"

    ---

    **Controller**: "SAUDIA 123, [SURFACE] WIND 340 DEGREES 5 KNOTS, RUNWAY 34R, CLEARED FOR TAKE-OFF"

    **Pilot**: "RUNWAY 34R, CLEARED FOR TAKE-OFF, SAUDIA 123"

!!! Warning "Do note"
    The pilot should not read back the surface winds, nor should the controller expect a readback of this.

### 2.4.2.2 Immediate take-off
For traffic reasons, **it may be necessary for the aircraft to take off immediately after lining up**.
!!! Example
    **Controller**: "SAUDIA 123, ARE YOU READY FOR IMMEDIATE DEPARTURE?"

    **Pilot**: "AFFIRM, SAUDIA 123"

    **Controller**: "SAUDIA 123, [SURFACE] WIND 340 DEGREES 5 KNOTS, RUNWAY 34R, CLEARED FOR IMMEDIATE TAKE-OFF"

    **Pilot**: "RUNWAY 34R, CLEARED FOR IMMEDIATE TAKE-OFF, SAUDIA 123"

    ---

    **Controller**: "SAUDIA 123, LINE UP RUNWAY 34R, BE READY FOR IMMEDIATE DEPARTURE"

    **Pilot**: "LINE UP RUNWAY 34R, WE ARE READY FOR IMMEDIATE DEPARTURE, SAUDIA 123"

During low visibility operations, the controller may request the pilot to **report when airborne**.

## 2.4.3 Cancelling take-off clearance
Due to unexpected traffic developments or a departing aircraft taking longer to take off than anticipated, it may be necessary to **cancel the take-off clearance** or quickly clear the runway for landing traffic. In such situations, the pilot must **acknowledge the instruction** with their **callsign and intentions**.
!!! Example
    **Controller**: "ADEAL 414, TAKE OFF IMMEDIATELY OR HOLD SHORT OF RUNWAY"

    **Pilot**: "HOLDING SHORT, ADEAL 414"

    ---

    **Controller**: "ADEAL 414, TAKE-OFF IMMEDIATELY OR VACATE RUNWAY"

    **Pilot**: "TAKING OFF, ADEAL 414"

    ---

    **Controller**: "ADEAL 414, HOLD POSITION, CANCEL TAKE-OFF CLEARANCE, I SAY AGAIN CANCEL TAKE-OFF DUE <Reason> ACKNOWLEDGE"

    **Pilot**: "HOLDING/STOPPING, ADEAL 414"

When a pilot abandons the take-off maneuver, the control tower should be informed as soon as practicable. The pilot should also request assistance or taxi instructions as needed.
!!! Example
    **Pilot**: "EMIRATES 804, STOPPING"

    **Controller**: “EMIRATES 804, ROGER” OR “EMIRATES 804, ROGER, DO YOU REQUIRE ASSISTANCE”

    **Pilot**: "REQUEST RETURN TO STAND, EMIRATES 804."

    **Controller**: "EMIRATES 804, ROGER, TAXI FIRST RIGHT, CONTACT GROUND 121.600"

    **Pilot**: "FIRST RIGHT AND CONTACT GROUND 121.600, EMIRATES 804"